Title: Cyclotomic fields
Date: 2016-04-30
Category: Arithmetic/Number-Fields
Tags: Algebraic number fields, Cyclotomic fields, Cyclotomic polynomial
Slug: cyclotomic-fields
Status: draft

[TOC]

### Definition
---------------

<!-- PELICAN_BEGIN_SUMMARY -->
Etymology of cyclotomy is from Greek [κύκλος](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/%CE%BA%CF%8D%CE%BA%CE%BB%CE%BF%CF%82) (cyclos, circle)
and [τόμος](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/%CF%84%CF%8C%CE%BC%CE%BF%CF%82) (tomos, cutting). Mathematical context of cyclotomy
entails division of circle into equal parts, à la the study by C. F. Gauss of arithmetic of roots of unity, embedded into the unit 
circle in the complex plane as the points $\zeta^k_n = e^{2\pi ik/n}$ where $n \geq 1$ is a fixed integer and $1 \leq k \leq n$, 
done in his seminal work *Disquisitiones Arithmeticae*.

The $n^{\mathrm{th}}$ cyclotomic field is the extension of $\mathbb Q$ containing set $\mu_n$ of all $n^{\mathrm{th}}$ roots of unity.
Later on Gauss's study was continued using the methods of algebraic number fields and associated topics, which approach we follow.
<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

Cyclotomic field extensions can be defined for any field $K$ as above. It is also enough to attach a single primitive $n^{\mathrm{th}}$ root of unity.
For subfields of $\mathbb C$ such as $\mathbb Q$, one can use the transcendental function $e^x$ to generate them, as e.g., $\zeta_n = e^{2\pi i/n}$. 
Then the $n^{\mathrm{th}}$ cyclotomic field may also be defined as the field extension $\mathbb{Q} (\zeta_n)$ of $\mathbb Q$ generated by $\zeta _n.$ 
This contains $\mu_n,$ the set of $n^{\mathrm{th}}$ roots of unity, which again contains $\zeta_n$ and therefore $\mathbb Q(\zeta_n) = \mathbb Q(\mu_n)$. Some investigations of cyclotomy conspicuously use such transcendental functions, e. g., in the theory of Gauss sums. 


### Cyclotomic polynomials (primes)
---------------------

The cylcotomic field $\mathbb{Q} (\zeta_n)$ is the splitting field of the cyclotomic polynomial $\Phi_n(x)$, which may be described in the simpler
case where $n = p$, a prime number, as follows. The cyclotomic polynomial is

$$\Phi_p(x) = \frac{x^p -1}{x -1} = x^{p-1} + \cdots + x + 1. $$

Substituting $x + 1$ for $x$,

$$\frac{(x+1)^p - 1}{x} = x^{p - 1} + \binom{p}{p-1}x^{p - 2} + \cdots + \binom{p}2 x + \binom{p}1,$$

where $\binom{n}{m}$ denotes the binomial coefficient. Applying Eisenstein's criterion, this polynomial is irreducible. 
Therefore so is the original polynomial $\Phi_p(x)$, as $x \mapsto x+1$ is an automorphism of the polynomial ring $\mathbb Q[x]$. 
Therefore $\Phi_p(x)$ is an irreducible polynomial whose roots are $p^{\mathrm{th}}$ roots of unity save $1$ itself. 
Therefore it factorizes to

$$\Phi_p(x) = (x- \zeta)(x- \zeta^2) \cdots (x-\zeta^{p-1}),$$

where $\zeta = \zeta_p$, and thus $\mathbb Q(\mu_p)$ is the splitting field of $\Phi_p(x)$.


*[FLT]: Fermat's Last Theorem

### Kummer's "proof" of FLT
------------------

For more details on Kummer's effort, please refer to chapter 1 of Washington's book $\! \ref{wash}.$ 

Let $p \geq 5$ be a prime and let $\zeta$ be primitive $p^{\mathrm{th}}$ root of unity. 
Then, $\Phi_p(x) = x^{p-1} + \cdots + x + 1$ and $x^p- 1 = (x-1)(x-\zeta )(x- \zeta^2) . \cdots . (x - \zeta^{p-1}).
Replacing $x$ by $-x/y$, 

$$(x^p + y^p) = (x+y)(x + \zeta y)(x + \zeta^2 y) . \cdots . (x + \zeta^{p-1}y).$$

$\Phi_p(x)$ is of degree $p-1$ and irreducible with root $\zeta$; so $\zeta^{p-1} = -(1+ +\zeta + \cdots + \zeta^{p-2})$.
The set $\{ 1, \zeta , \zeta^2 , \ldots , \zeta^{p-2} \}$ forms a basis for $\mathbb Q(\zeta)$ considered as a vector space over $\mathbb Q$.
It also forms a basis for the ring $\mathbb Z [\zeta]$ considered as a module over $\mathbb Z$.

The Fermat equation factorizes in $\mathbb Z[\zeta]$ as:

$$z^p = (x+y)(x + \zeta y)(x + \zeta^2 y) . \cdots . (x + \zeta^{p-1}y) $$

### Cyclotomic polynomials (general)

Generally, the $n^{\mathrm{th}}$ cyclotomic polynomial is defined as the monic, minimal polynomial in $\mathbb{Z}[x]$ for a primitive $n^{\mathrm{th}}$ root of unity.
In the case where $n = p$, this agrees with $\Phi_p(x)$ defined above, because any $n^{\mathrm{th}}$ root of $1$ satisfies the polynomial $x^n -1$  and $x^p-1$ factorizes as $(x-1)\Phi_p(x)$ into irreducibles.

### Ring of integers

Its ring of integers is $\mathbb{Z}[\zeta_n]$. 

### Galois group

This is a Galois extension with Galois group the multiplicative group 
$\left(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z} \right)^\times$ of the ring $\left(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z} \right)$. 

--------------
### Bibliography
--------------


1. $$\label{wash}$$ Washington, Lawrence C., Introduction to Cyclotomic Fields, Graduate Texts in Mathematics 83, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1997. 
1. S. Lang, Cyclotomic Fields I and II, Combined 2nd ed. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 121. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990. $\label{lang}$

