Title: Modules over a PID -- Invariant Factor Decomposition -- Structure Theorem and Applications
Date: 2016-05-17
Category: Algebra/Commutative Rings
Tags: Modules over PIDs, Principal Ideal Domains, Invariant Factor Decomposition, Finitely generated Abelian Groups, Rational Canonical Form, Companion Matrix, Commutative Rings
Slug: structure-theorem-for-modules-over-a-pid
Status: draft

[TOC]

-----------------------------

### Modules over a PID
=======================

--------------------------------------

All rings are assumed to be commutative with identity, and ring homomorphisms must take $1$ to $1$.

<!-- PELICAN_BEGIN_SUMMARY -->

The structure theorem for modules over PIDs is as follows.

Let $R$ be a principal ideal domain, i. e., a domain in which every ideal $I$ is a principal ideal of the form $(r)$ for some $r \in R$.
Let $M$ be a finitely generated module over $R$. Then, there exists a unique decreasing sequence of ideals 
$(d_1)\supseteq(d_2)\supseteq\cdots\supseteq(d_n)$ such that {{math|''M''}} isomorphic to the sum of cyclic modules:

$$M\cong\bigoplus_i R/(d_i) = R/(d_1)\oplus R/(d_2)\oplus\cdots\oplus R/(d_n).$$

This article goes through a proof of this theorem. Two particular cases are also given, viz., structure theorem for finitely
generated abelian groups and rational canonical form from linear algebra.

<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

-----------------

When $R = \mathbb Z$, modules over $R$ are nothing but abelian groups, and the structure theorem becomes:

**Structure Theorem for Finitely Generated Abelian Groups**
Let $B$ be a finitely abelian group. Then, there are uniquely determined non-negative integers 
$d_1, d_2, \ldots , d_n$ such that, $d_1 | d_2 | \cdots | d_n$, and,
$$ G \cong \mathbb Z/(d_1) \oplus \mathbb Z/(d_2) \oplus \cdots \oplus \mathbb Z/(d_n).$$

It is possible that $d_i = 0$. Such $d_i$ form the *free part* and
the rest the *torsion part*.

More generally, let $R$ be a domain and $M$ a module over $R$. Let $x \in m$. 
The annihilator $ann(x)$ is the ideal consisting of all $r$ in $R$ such that $rx = 0$.
The torsion submodule $M_\mathrm{tors}$ of $M$, also called its torsion part, is defined to be all those elements in $M$ with nonzero annihilator.
$M$ is said to have torsion if $M_\mathrm{tors}$ is nonzero.
It is said to be torsion-free if $M_\mathrm{tors}=0.$

**Lemma 1** $M_\mathrm{tors}$ is a submodule of $M$.

Following proof uses $R$ being a domain.

**Proof** 
Let $x, y \in M_\mathrm{tors}$ with $r_1x = 0, r_2y = 0$ and $r_1 \neq 0, r_2 \neq 0$.
Then $r_1 r_2 (x+y) = 0$ with $r_1 r_2 \neq 0$ so $x+y \in M_\mathrm{tors}$.
Suppose $x \in M_\mathrm{tors}$ with $rx = 0$ where $r \in x$ and $r \neq 0$. 
Then given $s \in R$, it follows $r(sx)=0$ so $sx \in M_\mathrm{tors}$.
Therefore $M_\mathrm{tors}$ is submodule of $M$. 
**Q.E.D**

-------

**Lemma 2** The quotient $M/M_\mathrm{tors}$ is torsion-free.

This proof also uses $R$ being a domain.

**Proof**
Suppose $M/M_\mathrm{tors}$ has torsion; i. e., there exists $x \in M$ with $x \notin M_\mathrm{tors}$ with also an $r \in R, r \neq 0$ such that $rx \in M_\mathrm{tors}$. 
Which is to say, there exists no nonzero $s \in R$ with $sx = 0$ but there exists nonzero $r^\prime \in R$ with $r^\prime rx =0$, which implies $r^\prime r=0$ which is impossible if $R$ is a domain.
**Q.E.D.**

------------

**Lemma 3** Let $R$ be a commutative ring. If $R^{n_1} \cong R^{n_1}$ as $R$-modules, then $n=m$.

This proof[^ConradK-modulespid] does not require $R$ to be a domain.

**Proof** 
Let $\mathfrak m$ be a maximal ideal of $R$. 
Let $M_1 = R^{n_1}$ and $M_2 = R^{n_2}$.
If $M_1 \cong M_2$ then $\mathfrak m M_1 \cong \mathfrak m M_2$.
Thus $(M_1/\mathfrak mM_1) \cong (M_2/\mathfrak mM_2)$ as $(R/\mathfrak m)$-modules.
That is to say, $(R/\mathfrak m)^{n_1} \cong (R/\mathfrak m)^{n_2}$ as $(R/\mathfrak m)$-vector spaces; therefore $n_1 = n_2$.
**Q.E.D.**

-------------

**Proposition 4**
Let $R$ be a PID. Let $M$ be a module over $R$ with a set of generators $x_1, \ldots, x_n$. 
Let $N$ be a submodule of $M$.
Then there exists $y_1, \ldots , y_m$ that generate $N$ with $m \leq n$.
The $y_i$ have the form $y_i = \sum_{i \leq j} a_{ij} x_j$ with $a_{ij} \in R$ and $1 \leq i \leq m$.

**Proof**

The proof proceeds by induction over $n$, the number of generators.
The theorem is trivially true for $n=0$.
It is also true for $n=1$, as $M \cong R$ then and submodules are ideals of $R$ which is a PID.
Consider arbitary $n > 0$ and assume that the theorem is already proved for modules with less than $n$ generators.
$M$ is a module with generators $x_1, \ldots, x_n$. 
Let $M^\prime$ be the module generated by $x_2, x_3, \ldots, x_n$.
Let $N^\prime = N \cap M^\prime$.
If $N = N^\prime$, theorem is true by induction.
**Q.E.D.**


Let $R$ be a ring. Let $S$ be a set.
A free $R$-module[^Garret-fgmodules] $M$ on generators $S$ is an $R$-module $M$ and a set inclusion $i: S \hookrightarrow M$ such that given any $R$-module $N$ and any map $f: S \to N$, there exists a homomorphism $\tilde f : M \to N$ such that $f \circ i = f$.

**Proposition**
Let $R$ be a PID and let $M$ be a finitely generated torsion-free module over $R$. Then $M$ is free.

**Corollary**
Let $R$ be a PID and $M$ a finitely generated $R$-module. Then $M$ is expressible as $M \cong M_{tors} \oplus F$ where $F$ is a free $R$-module.

**Proof**
$M/M_{tors}$ is finitely generated as $M$ is.
It is torsion-free by lemma 2. 
Thus it is free. 
By the property of a free module, the quotient map $M \to M/M_{tors}$ admits a section $\sigma : M/M_{tors} \to M$; i. e., the short exact sequence $0 \to M_{tors} \to M \to M/M_{tors} \to 0$ splits. $M$ [therefore decomposes as a direct sum](http://www.math.uconn.edu/~kconrad/blurbs/linmultialg/splittingmodules.pdf).
**Q.E.D.**



----------

--------
### Bibliography
--------------

[^vanderWaerden1930]: van der Waerden, B. L., Moderne Algebra, 1930; Algebra I & II, Springer, 1991.
[^Jacobson1985]: Jacobson, N., Basic Algebra - I, 1985.
[^Lang1993]: Lang, S., Algebra, Springer, 2002.
[^ConradK-modulespid]: Conrad, K., [Modules over a PID](http://www.math.uconn.edu/~kconrad/blurbs/linmultialg/modulesoverPID.pdf).
[^Garret-modulespid]: Garret, P., [Modules over a PID](http://www.math.umn.edu/~garrett/m/algebra/notes/10.pdf).
[^Garret-fgmodules]: Garret, P., [Finitely generated modules](http://www.math.umn.edu/~garrett/m/algebra/notes/11.pdf).

