Title: Cayley-Hamilton Theorem and Nakayama Lemma
Date: 2015-05-08
Modified: 2015-05-08
Category: Algebra/Commutative Rings
Tags: Cayley-Hamilton Theorem, Commutative Algebra, Nakayama Lemma, Modules over commutative rings
Slug: nakayama-lemma-and-applications
Status: draft

[TOC]

--------
### Introduction and examples
--------

<!-- PELICAN_BEGIN_SUMMARY -->

First, we state the **Cayley-Hamilton theorem** from linear algebra, in its usual pithy form: 
*Every matrix satisfies its own characteristic equation*.

More precisely, let $A$ be an endomorphism of a finite dimensional vector space over a field.
Its characteristic polynomial is given by the determinant $p(\lambda) = \mathrm{det}\ (\lambda \mathbf{1} - A)$, 
where $\lambda$ is an indeterminate and $\mathbf{1}$ the identity transformation. Then, we have that $p(A) = 0$.
Now suppose $R$ is a
commutative ring and $I$ an ideal in it. Let $M$ be a module over $R$ generated by $n$ elements. 
Let $\varphi$ be a module endomorphism of $M$ such that $\varphi(M) \subset IM$. Then, there 
exists a polynomial $p(x) = x^n + a_1x^{n-1} + \cdots | a_{n-1}x + a_n$, where, 
$a_i \in I^i$ for $1 \leq i \leq n$, such that $p(x)$ satisfies the equality 
$p(\varphi) = 0 \in \mathrm{End}(M, M).$  This statement is the **Cayley-Hamilton theorem for finitely 
generated modules over a commutative ring**.

**Nakayama Lemma** is its following consequence: Let $R, I, M$ be as above. In addition, suppose $IM =M$.
Then it follows that there exists an $r \in R$ with $r \equiv 1\ (\mathrm{mod}\ I)$, such that $rM=0$.
Morever, if $I \subset \mathrm{rad}(R)$, the Jacobson radical, i. e., the intersection of maximal ideals of
$R$, then it follows that $M =0$.

We prove both Cayley-Hamilton Theorem and Nakayama Lemma in this article, and demonstrate a few consequences.
<!-- PELICAN_END_SUMMARY -->

**Nakayama Lemma** is its following consequence: Let $R, I, M$ be as above. In addition, suppose $IM =M$.
Then it follows that there exists an $r \in R$ with $r \equiv 1\ (\mathrm{mod}\ I)$, such that $rM=0$.
Morever, if $I \subset \mathrm{rad}(R)$, the Jacobson radical, i. e., the intersection of maximal ideals of
$R$, then it follows that $M =0$.

We intend to prove both theorems in this article.

-----------------
### Cayley-Hamilton Theorem over a Commutative Ring
-----------------

As per the convention in commutative algebra, a ring $R$ is always assumed to have an identity $1$ and
ring homomorphisms must take $1$ to $1$.

----------------
### Nakayama Lemma
----------------

**Lemma 1** 
Let $R$ be a commutative ring with identity. Let $x \in R$. Then, for $x$ to be in 
$\mathrm{rad}(R)$, the Jacobson radical, i. e., the intersection of maximal ideals of $R$,
it is necessary and sufficient that $1 + xR$ consists of units in $R$.

**Proof** Suppose $x \in \mathrm{rad}(R)$. Then, for any $r \in R$, the element $1 + xr$ 
is not contained in any maximal ideal of $R$. But, every non-unit generates a proper ideal
of $R$, and this must be contained in a maximal ideal by Zorn's lemma. Therefore $1 +xR$
must consist entirely of units.

Next suppose $x \notin \mathrm{rad}(R)$. Then $x$ belongs to $R \setminus I$ where $I$ is a
maximal ideal. By maximality of $I$, we have $I+xR = R$; in particular, there exists 
$r \in R$ and $a \in I$ such that $1 = a + xr$. So the element $1 - xr$ is a nonunit. 
Thus the proof is done in both direction. `Q. E. D.`

Matsumura[1] mentions that Nakayama's lemma is also due to Krull and Azumaya. The following is the proof.

**Proof of Nakayama Lemma**
Let $\varphi = \mathbf{1}$ in the statement of the Cayley-Hamilton Theorem for finitely generated modules.
Then, there exists $a_1, \ldots , a_n$ with $a_i \in I^i$ such that 
$r = 1 + a_1 + \cdots + a_n = 0 \in \mathrm{End}(M,M),$ i. e., $rM=0$, and $r \equiv 1\ \mathrm{mod}\ I$.
If $I \subset \mathrm{rad}(R)$, then by lemma 1, $r$ is a unit, and multiplying both sides by $r^{-1}$,
we see that $M = 0$. `Q. E. D.`


------
#### Local Rings
------

It is possible to characterize bases of finitely generated modules over local rings, using Nakayama.

**Corollary 1** Let $R$ be a local ring, $\mathfrak m$ its maximal ideal and $k R/\mathfrak m$ the quotient field.
Let $M$ be a finitely generated $R$-module and let $\bar M = M/\mathfrak m M$. Let $n$ be the dimension of 
the vector space $M$ over $k$. Then,
1. Take a basis $\bar m_1, \ldots , \bar m_n$ for $\bar M$ over $k$ and pick representatives $m_i \in M$ for
each $\bar m_i \in \bar M$. Then, $m_1, \ldots , m_n$ is a minimal basis of $M$.
2. 
-
-
------
####Bibliography
------


